How Deep is Your Source?
========================

Aymeric Mansoux

Within the realm of archiving and conservation, free and open licenses
are a useful tool to make both the reuse and the conservation of digital
art more feasible (Laforet 2010). Even though it is undeniable that such
licenses have an overall positive effect, they do however struggle when
it comes to defining the components, materials, and assets that have
been involved in the creation of a work. The lingo used in such licenses
stems from the world of software and despite its adaptation to cultural
works, it still hasn’t got rid of the binary nature of its origin. When
a software license requires the access to its source, it refers to the
“source code,” a well-known object in the making of software that is
easy to define and identify. While this perfectly fits a particular form
of art, in particular art that involves computational processes, it is
questionable whether this concept of source code can be literally ported
to other cultural expressions, such as moving or still digital images,
sounds, and by extension multimedia and rich media works.\
In this paper, I argue that such works require both a media-specific as
well as a metaphorical understanding of what source code is in the
context of art, music, and design in order to make free and open
licenses valuable for conservation, archiving, and of course in-depth
study and appropriation of the former. Behind this challenge lies the
issues of accessibility and control with free cultural expressions and
open knowledge, and how these compare with their software-centric parent
definitions.

A Brief History of Software Freedom
-----------------------------------

Source code is a collection of computer instructions written using a
human-readable computer language.\[1\] The source code can then be
either compiled in machine code and executed manually to perform some
tasks as a stand-alone program or as part of a larger software. It can
also be interpreted, in which case the source is both translated and
executed on the fly. The role of source code in the production and
manipulation of software is essential. Its access allows virtually any
modification of the latter, whether it is about adding new features or
fixing bugs. This importance is best exemplified with the free software
movement, and the creation of the Free Software Foundation (FSF) in
1985. Since its very beginning, the goal of the FSF has been to provide
an alternative to the proprietary software model that relies
specifically on controlling the access to and distribution of source
code and compiled software.

> ‘The word ‘free’ in our name does not refer to price; it refers to
> freedom. First, the freedom to copy a program and redistribute it to
> your neighbors, so that they can use it as well as you. Second, the
> freedom to change a program, so that you can control it instead of it
> controlling you; for this, the source code must be made available to
> you’ (Stallman 1989, 8).

The foundation, as well as its early attempts to define software
freedom, has been an inspiration for many, including Ian Murdock, the
founder of the Debian operating system (Murdock 1994). This influence
was further demonstrated as this project grew and published its own free
software guidelines, in which crucial importance was given to source
code (Perens 1997). Eventually, this guideline was modified a few years
later to serve as the Open Source definition (Perens 1999) of the newly
founded Open Source Initiative (OSI) which resulted from the 1998 call
to embrace the term ‘open source’ (Raymond 1998). Yet, probably the most
important text written on free software is about the four essential
freedoms of program users:

> ‘The freedom to run the program, for any purpose (freedom 0).
>
> The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it to your needs
> (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a precondition for this.
>
> The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor
> (freedom 2).
>
> The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to
> the public, so that the whole community benefits. (freedom 3). Access
> to the source code is a precondition for this’ (Stallman 2000).

According to Bruce Perens, these freedoms established by Richard M.
Stallman were only published on the Free Software Foundation website
after the creation of the OSI, ‘as an alternative to the Open Source
Definition’ (Perens 2009). He suggests, however, that they probably
existed prior to their online release. As a matter of fact they even
existed as three freedoms, which are now numbered 1, 2 and 3. The
freedom 0 was added at a later stage (Stallman 1999).

These parallel efforts from the FSF, Debian, and the OSI work as both a
guideline for new, and a filter for existing contracts specific to
intellectual property: the licenses. Indeed, good will, manifestos, and
announcements are clearly not enough to enforce consistently these
visions and definitions. To enable the latter, the license works as a
contract between the copyright holder of the source code (for licenses
relying on copyright) and its user. It makes sure that software freedom
and openness are ensured once the software is published, and at the same
time it provides legal mechanisms in case of non-respect of the license.

In practice, the relationship between source code, license, and
accessibility is clearly visible in the way the Debian operating system
is put together. With a standard installation, Debian provides the usual
graphical user interface desktop metaphor similar to MacOS or Windows,
and a collection of several free and open source software both for
general and specialized tasks. What is interesting is how this operating
system is connected to several repositories of software and their
respective source code. The latter is distributed as packages,
collections of files that can be copied or downloaded from offline and
online data storage and installed on one’s computer. More specifically,
source packages provide several items:

-   the original source code written by the author(s) of the original
    software, as well as optional patches to apply on top of it and
    the license(s) under which these files are published;

-   the metadata of the distributed software, that is its description,
    category, list of author(s) and maintainer(s), etc;

-   the conditions of its access in the means of technical dependencies.

Finally, any changes in these files are logged and stored in the
packages themselves. These changes combined with the storage of previous
versions of the software, and its source code, as well as the ability to
access these at any time literally turn the Debian operating system into
a software archaeological excavation site.

In addition, these packages can be mirrored by anyone with enough space
and bandwidth, and are currently available on nearly five hundred
officially registered servers across the world (Debian Project 2011).
From a user perspective, package managers, or an administrative
software, can then be used to install, remove, or upgrade software, and
as a consequence maintain one’s operating system to one’s liking. This
process is not unidirectional; users are given the possibility to help
and give feedback by writing documentation, submitting bug reports,
writing patches for their favourite software, even maintaining such a
software themselves by becoming official maintainers and, why not,
official Debian developers as well. Most importantly the whole
infrastructure can be appropriated and derived into new projects, new
Debian-based operating systems, and software collections.\[2\] In that
sense the Debian infrastructure is not a classic form of dedicated
archiving system: instead, here archiving, conservation, distribution,
and access are merged into one replicable structure.

\[\[Flowchart of the life cycle of a Debian package, 2005, Martin F.
Krafft, based on the work by Kevin Mark (CC BY-SA 2.5)\]\]

Such a participatory living archive is possible because of the access
and distribution of the source code by the means of a techno-legal
framework that allows for a certain fluidity and manipulation of
information from the public lists where software maintenance is
discussed to the private computers where it is effectively manipulated
and executed. It is a great example of how source code can become an
invitation

> ‘for creative practice encouraging collaboration and further
> development of existing work on the level of contribution,
> manipulation and recombination, and its further release under the same
> conditions in the public domain’ (Krysa and Sedek 2008).\[14\]

Now, whether a work would be code itself, its manifestation through the
execution of the compiled code, or a combination of both, it’s not a big
stretch to see how Debian can be an inspiration to support art that fits
within this form (Candeira 2006). Ultimately, both public and private
collectors, venues, and libraries could benefit in a cooperative and
distributed resource for free and open source code poetry, generative
art, and software art. Generally speaking, the same would apply for art
where software elements could also be released under free and open
source licenses and integrated in distributed infrastructures. In the
end, regardless of how one wants to frame software – as art, tool or
magical information – the technical and legal benefits of free and open
source software are the same, because this is still software that we are
dealing with.

This is not a fantasy or wishful thinking: in practice a free and open
source GNU/Linux distribution such as Puredyne\[4\] has been
distributing works from artists such as Alex McLean and Martin Howse
(Laforet 2011, 137). Next to works that are already distributed by
Debian, such as *Electric Sheep* (1999) a popular screensaver by Scott
Draves,\[5\] it is possible for artists releasing their work as free and
open source software to be approached by distribution maintainers to
help integrate their project within free and open source operating
systems (Laforet 2010). It goes without saying that such software must
comply with the distribution’s guideline and understanding of
user-friendly applications. While there is no trouble for a work like
*Electric Sheep* that effectively runs as a screensaver, the same cannot
be said, thankfully, for all software art.\[6\]

But what about works that are neither code nor software based? While
software is undeniably a cultural expression (Fuller 2003), all cultural
expressions are obviously not software. How would that practically work?

Enter free culture…

Free and Open Content for the Masses
------------------------------------

The 2000s saw the birth of several projects and movements that found
their inspiration in free and open source software. The transition from
software to culture and knowledge is, for instance, clearly visible in
the *Manifiesto de Hipatia*, which connects free software to activism
through the value of knowledge access (Teza et al. 2001). Yet, being
driven by different understandings of what freedom and openness mean in
the context of culture and knowledge, in practice the more explicit
definitions that follow can differ greatly from one to another. These
differences are also made visible in their selection of licenses that
match their respective intentions and agendas. First of all, possibly
the closest adaptation of software freedom to a broader cultural context
are the ‘four kinds of free knowledge’:

> ‘The freedom to use the knowledge, for any purpose (freedom 0).
>
> The freedom to study how the knowledge applies, and adapt it to your
> needs (freedom 1). Access to the source information is a precondition
> for this.
>
> The freedom to redistribute knowledge so you can help your neighbor
> (freedom 2).
>
> The freedom to improve the knowledge, and release your improvements to
> the public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3). Access
> to the source information is a precondition for this’ (Peña-López
> 2003).

Another one is the Free/Libre Knowledge definition, from the Free
Knowledge Foundation (FKF) that has been created to describe what users
should be free to do with cultural expressions:

> ‘(0) use the work for any purpose
>
> \(1) study its mechanisms, to be able to modify and adapt it to their own
> needs
>
> \(2) make and distribute copies, in whole or in part
>
> \(3) enhance and/or extend the work and share the result’.\[7\]

Yet another are the ‘essential freedoms’, written as a guide to decide
whether or not a license can qualify to a free culture license:

> ‘The freedom to use and perform the work \[…\]
>
> The freedom to study the work and apply the information\[…\]
>
> The freedom to redistribute copies \[…\]
>
> The freedom to distribute derivative works \[…\]’ (Definition of Free
> Cultural Works 2007).

A further approach is the open content definition, which is an attempt
to make a stronger distinction between rework and remix. It is also a
twist on the four freedoms, and in this case it has been renamed the
‘4Rs Framework’:

> ‘Reuse – Use the work verbatim, just exactly as you found it
>
> Revise – Alter or transform the work so that it better meets your
> needs
>
> Remix – Combine the (verbatim or altered) work with other works to
> better meet your needs
>
> Redistribute – Share the verbatim work, the reworked work, or the
> remixed work with others’ (Willey 2007).

Finally, another notable effort is the Open Definition, or Open
Knowledge Definition, that ‘sets out principles to define “openness” in
relation to content and data’ (Open Knowledge Foundation 2012). The
definition, too long to reproduce here, has been directly derived from
Perens’ Open Source definition, which, as mentioned previously, was
itself derived from Perens’ own work on the Debian’s free software
guideline.

With such a strong affiliation both in style and content, the link to
their parent software-centric definitions is blatant. In spite of that,
and taking a closer look, even though the first attempt in porting the
software freedom to knowledge did mention the idea of source in its
definition, the efforts that followed stopped mentioning it.

The reason for this is simple: while computer software is a cultural
expression, not all cultural expressions are computer software.
Therefore, the computer-specific issue of source code can be seen as not
so relevant in a broader approach to free culture and open knowledge.

Towards the Borges Public License
---------------------------------

Seeing now that the free culture license definition, the open knowledge
definition and other approaches are not a perfect transposition of free
and open source software due to the lack of or incomplete approach to
defining what is a source, the question needs to be asked how this can
impact free/libre/open content/knowledge/expression/work (FLOCKEW)?

First of all from a simple qualitative perspective, it means that any
content is fine to publish and distribute. For instance, a
low-resolution, highly compressed, photo or video can be distributed
freely under these licenses. While this work perfectly qualifies as
FLOCKEW, its value becomes questionable when the high-resolution, raw,
or less destructively compressed “original” still remains under
monopolistic exclusive rights. Another aspect is what the freedom
defined project calls the “practical modifiability” of a work that is
licensed with certain free culture licenses: how in practice a work can
be appropriated and modified by someone else. For instance, if the
licensed work is an image composed of several elements, its practical
modifiability is affected if the author decides to publish such an image
as a flatten-down work, or if instead, she or he also provides the
layers used to make this final image.

\[image\]

Furthermore, there is an unavoidable recursion triggered by the
existence of such external ‘source’ files. Indeed, and still using the
example of a digital collage, what would happen if the layers provided
were themselves derived from other ‘originals’? Shouldn’t they be
included as well? What about the font used for a caption or logo, what
would be the practical modifiability of a rasterized text layer? Would
it make sense to provide the font file? If someone wants to practically
modify the file, beyond the one-dimensional mash-up or remix, such
elements are very much needed. A last problem arises with the licensing
of these media assets. If an author would distribute the ‘source’ of his
or her work, this source being a distinct cultural expression itself,
the author is free to distribute the material under separate licenses.
Is it acceptable then for free content to have its assets under non-free
culture licenses? What about license compatibility? Is it acceptable if
these external cultural expressions are freely licensed, yet using
closed standards from proprietary software?

\[image\]

To address such issues Rob Myers (2007) imagines what an ideal cultural
source would be. He suggests considering five attributes:

-   transparent, in an easily editable text-based format;

-   full quality, in a standard that permits the recreation of the final
    format;

-   complete, so that all the materials to produce the distributed work
    are provided;

-   unencumbered, that is, free of patents and DRM (Digital rights
    management);

-   structured, as provided in a descriptive format, such as
    vector graphics.

Even though the open definition excludes explicitly software from its
definition of knowledge, therefore avoiding the question of source in
the distribution of open works, the question of the source is actually
covered by the freedom defined project. In fact, to be a truly free
cultural work, a work must respect four more conditions, one of them is
being specific about the concept of source data:

> ‘Availability of source data: Where a final work has been obtained
> through the compilation or processing of a source file or multiple
> source files, all underlying source data should be available alongside
> the work itself under the same conditions. This can be the score of a
> musical composition, the models used in a 3D scene, the data of a
> scientific publication, the source code of a computer application, or
> any other such information’ (Definition of Free Cultural Works 2007).

However, unlike with free software licenses this condition is not
contractual. It is simply part of a guideline to decide whether or not a
work can be called a free cultural work. Put differently, an author does
not have to respect this condition when using a free culture license. In
practice it is thus possible to distribute non-free works with free
culture licenses, literally turning the popular understanding of free
culture into a messy mix of both free and non-free cultural expressions.

At this point things can start to get fairly confusing. What started as
a simple exploration into the transposition of free software to free
culture, is now ending up in a maze of concurrent definitions. Each of
them pointing to a ‘Choose Your Own Adventure’ labyrinth of licenses,
where every step seems to further obfuscate the source of the problem,
literally. As a matter of fact Creative Commons even use the misleading
term ‘approved for free cultural works’\[8\] for its licenses that
respect the free culture license definition, whereas it really should
say that such or such licenses are free culture licenses; no less, no
more.

No matter how annoyingly picky it may seem, the question of cultural
sources must be raised. It is essential to understand the value and the
limits of a FLOCKEW in the context of archiving and conservation.
Without source information and in the case of conservation and
reappropriation, the advantage of such practice is limited. In effect,
if there is such a thing as an artwork ‘source code’, it must contain
much more information than remixable elements. Such a source is made of
everything that a work contains, from the dirt that feeds its roots to
the canopy. A radical approach like this one should not to be understood
solely from a paratextual or paramedial perspective, but instead in a
very practical way as best exemplified with the *PrayStation Hardrive*
published in 2001.\[9\] *PrayStation Hardrive* is a CD-ROM that contains
‘raw data’ from the hard drive of new media artist Joshua Davis; data
that is meant to be explored, studied, and reused. While the content is
far from being a bitstream copy of his drive, it is nonetheless quite an
impressive collection of 3637 files, including many Macromedia Flash
‘source’ files, making the intention behind the project close to the
free and open source ethos.\[10\] In practice this parallel is more of a
misunderstanding of how free software and open source operate as the
files have been released without any licenses,\[11\] making the drive
fall into the gooey swamp that is unspecified public domain and default
copyright laws. Yet its immense positive impact on the Flash community
at that time, both as an educational and cultural artefact, is a very
direct illustration that without a dump of an artist’s storage device no
complete works or biography can be written (Cramer 2003).

In the end, a thorough publication of properly licensed source materials
for works of art is rare and is limited to artists and collectives
already close to free and open source software communities. Exposed to
such practices in the software they use, some of them eventually apply
the same philosophy to their own work, and make many elements of the
latter publicly available in repositories, using different software
licenses (Lee 2008). However, such an attitude towards the meticulous
sharing of source material is unlikely to become popular due to the
complete or partial disappearance of an articulated concept of source in
the licensing of FLOCKEW. This is the reason why some free culture
licenses, more specifically from Creative Commons, should not be used
for software. By cleaning up the computer jargon when software freedom
was transposed to culture, the moral justification of free software,
which was embedded in this idea of source code availability, disappeared
as well. In spite of the idea of defined deliberative free culture
presented as an ethical counterpart of the aggregative market driven CC
licensing approach, the ethics of free culture have no means to
materialise. The result of this, and in a strange twist, the imperfect
transposition of software freedom to cultural freedom has also a
negative impact on free and open source software itself:

> ‘Can I apply a Creative Commons license to software?
>
> We recommend against using Creative Commons licenses for software.
> \[…\] Unlike software-specific licenses, CC licenses do not contain
> specific terms about the distribution of source code, which is often
> important to ensuring the free reuse and modifiability of
> software’.\[15\]

Indeed CC licensed software, even though as culturally free as free and
open source software, is in fact a pseudo form of free and open source
software. For instance, an obfuscated and compressed JavaScript library
can easily be distributed with a CC BY-SA license, or simply a CC BY
license, therefore encouraging the widespread of that library, yet
making it clear that its inner mechanisms are not the concerns of anyone
but its original authors. In this case, free culture in practice seems
closer to a gratis sharing consumer culture rather than a liberated and
empowered productive apparatus.

The problem of source in FLOCKEW has yet to be solved at the time of
writing, but some efforts are worth mentioning. In fact, as early as
2004, the Open Art Network started to work on the Open Art license
(OAL), also known as the View Source license, or simply the Source
License.\[16\] Even though this license would be considered today as
non-free because it prohibited commercial use, it requested that ‘source
file/s for the work must remain accessible to the public’.
Unfortunately, there was no consideration on the nature of the standard
used for such source files. It could have been a proprietary format
using proprietary software, and would still be considered, not without
problems, as a valid source for the OAL.

Another take on the question can be found in the ongoing work from
French composer and pianist Valentin Villenave, on a license that would
solve some of the source issues discussed so far, yet unpublished to
this date. Villenave is an active member of the Copyleft Attitude
community from which the free culture FAL was born. His idea is to
modify the FAL, in a way that it would be required for the artist to
provide all intermediary source materials, which were used during the
creation of a work of art. This would include sketches, research and all
versions of these. If at any given time a source element is involved, it
must be provided, so as to avoid a situation, according to Villenave,
where what is given access to, is in fact a summary of the work and not
the work as a whole (Villenave 2011).

According to the musician, this approach would be a concrete way to
resist the passive and commodified consumption of free cultural
expressions, and connect back with the free software engineering
freedom, where reusability and modularity is necessary for any progress
and innovation, and at the same time to prevent free culture to turn
into gratis sharing consumer culture or a shareware culture, to use the
analogies mentioned before. However, with this extra step, it seems that
our problem is expanding further and further more, beyond the recursive
vertigo triggered by the diving into the cultural sources of cultural
sources: it is also reaching the context in which these very sources are
created.

After all, if someone aims to provide the source code of an artwork, the
capture of the creative process is completely relevant (Dekker 2010).
And so without noticing it, the frustration deriving from the lack of
definition of artistic sources makes us drift into the analysis and
recording of the artistic practice itself. Defining an artistic source
is as problematic as defining art, yet access to increasingly
sophisticated legal and technological tools, which can enforce a
fine-grained versioned capture of the artistic creation, directly feeds
into a desire to sample and make tangible the ‘participation mystique’
of the poet (Jung 2001). Indeed, if there is more to these sources than
just a flatten-down object, nothing is preventing us from also providing
electroencephalographic data, DNA samples, cosmological models, and
more, thus transforming the capture of pretty much any phenomenon into
the source of a work of art becoming noumenon. If anything at all it
might be better to rename our speculative ‘bitstream’ license the
*Borges Public License*, a real treat for the Babel librarians and their
lawyers, but very likely a nightmare for artists agreeing to sign with
their blood such a devilish contract in exchange for a speculative and
immortal openness.

Conclusion
----------

Until a serious copyright reform, or why not complete abolition, takes
place, it is undeniable that projects that promote FLOCKEW are very much
welcome and needed. Practically speaking the usage of licenses that fit
the free culture license definition or the open knowledge definition
simplifies a lot and unifies the process of archiving, distribution, and
access to culture and knowledge; that is, of course, in the very
specific context of works respectful of existing copyright laws (Mansoux
2011).

However, the ability to modify practically, therefore appropriate or
maintain such expressions, should not be taken for granted. This
situation puts free culture and open knowledge in a completely different
camp to the one of free and open source software. By not taking into
account the articulation of sources, free culture and open knowledge can
only provide an ersatz of the freedom found in free software. In the
end, what software freedom achieved for the user is disappearing in its
cultural transposition as the author is brought back into a position of
complete control over the reusability of his or her work by others. This
is possible because the author is the sole judge to decide whether or
not to provide sources, and what constitutes them.

So even if FLOCKEW licenses are very effective to fluidify information,
they have no effect on its actual usability. In that sense, Creative
Commons licenses can give a false sense of security. All the issues
covered in this paper represent as many potential backdoors waiting to
be exploited, as well as many opportunities to misunderstand how this
whole legal infrastructure operates. The very use of the cumbersome and
tongue-in-cheek FLOCKEW acronym in this text is to show the tip of the
iceberg, but it also shows the potential for diversity in a discourse
that is often over simplified. At the same time, it is clear that no
solutions can be satisfying when it comes to trying to define sources
both within a free culture and artistic context. There can only be
specific workarounds. Any rational attempt to define artistic sources is
simply not working because a general ‘one size fits all’ definition of
such sources will always tend to exclude practices rather than include
them. Besides this, there is a risk with trying to find a compromise by
simplifying and limiting the scope for valid sources of cultural
expressions. Doing so would only benefit certain forms of practices by
turning art into the by-product of rationalized transformations – as can
be seen with mainstream remix culture. Similarly, if the proto-free
culture era with its concurrent and messy attempts to define artistic
freedom and cultural freedom were signs of a healthy cultural diversity
and rich counter hegemonic dynamics, this is not the case anymore.
Nowadays free culture is essentially dominated by a very few licenses,
that are blindly accepted by cultural institutions who help disseminate
them further into the cultural field, inadvertently running the risk to
encourage the creation of a very mono-cultural commons.

The strength of free culture and open knowledge is not so much of being
a universal solution to solve copyright problems. Instead, it should
really be appreciated here as a device that makes suddenly tangible the
obfuscation and secrecy found in art practices and art conservation. The
most important aspects are the dynamics and intentions that are found in
communities involved in sharing cultural expressions, and how these can
or cannot be materialised into new, or be supported by existing
techno-legal frameworks. The organization of such communities can
effectively help rethink and reinvent the access to culture in the age
of distributed infrastructures by opening up the institutional walled
gardens of conservation. Museums, art institutions, and archives
urgently need to look closer at the different models of sharing in which
the conservation of content can be globally scaled and accessed publicly
while still benefiting from the love and care of a network of dedicated
collectors, instead of building a business model around zombified works,
exploiting their every possible permutation, and thus replicating at a
different scale the exploitative cultural dead-end found in the
relationship between media industries and copyright.

The question still remains, how deep is your source?

Notes
-----

\[1\] Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, ‘Source code’, http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Source\_code. Accessed 15 August 2012.

\[2\] The Ubuntu operating system is probably the most popular example
of such a fork.

\[3\] In this quote “public domain” should probably be understood in the
sense of a resource commonly put together and publicly accessible, as
most free and open source software is not in the public domain. They are
copyrighted material and made available through the license mechanism as
mentioned. However, it might be worth noting that Creative Commons CC0
license, which aims at simplifying the waiving of copyrights and related
or neighbouring rights, is currently compatible with the FSF General
Public License (GPL).

\[4\] Puredyne is an USB-bootable GNU/Linux operating system for
creative multimedia based on Ubuntu and Debian Live. For more
information see http://puredyne.org/about.html. Accessed 29 June 2012.

\[5\] For more information see, Draves 2005.

\[6\] In particular, this case was discussed during the *FLOSS+Art*
panel during the 2007 edition of the *make art* festival, taking as
example whether or not a ‘user friendly’ program exit mechanism should
be implemented in a work from Martin Howse, now that the software was
distributed in Puredyne.

\[7\] Available online: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libre\_knowledge.
Accessed 7 September 2012.

\[8\] The affiliation is made visible with a graphical badge in the
human-readable summaries of their licenses.

\[9\] For more information see, Davis (2011).

\[10\] For more information see, for example, Kirschenbaum 2008: 54, and
Čučković, and Stančić 2009: 157–67.

\[11\] Personal e-mail from Joshua Davis to the author, 8 June 2012.

\[12\] The license prohibits commercial use.

\[13\] Available online: http://three.org/openart/license/index.html.
Accessed 7 September 2012.

\[14\] Available online: http://artlibre.org/licence/lal/en. Accessed 7
September 2012.

\[15\]
https://wiki.creativecommons.org/index.php/Frequently\_Asked\_Questions.
Accessed May 2016.

\[16\] http://three.org/openart/license/. Accessed May 2016.

Bibliography
------------

Candeira, Javier. “Towards a Permanently Temporary Software Art Factory
(Notes for the Sustainability of Software Artifacts).” In *Readme 100.
Temporary Software Art Factory*, edited by Olga Goriunova, 105–21.
Norderstedt: Books on Demand GmbH, 2006.

Cramer, Florian. “Peer-to-Peer Services: Transgressing the Archive (and
Its Maladies?).” In *adonnaM.mp3 – Filesharing, the Hidden Revolution in
the Internet*, edited by Franziska Nori. Frankfurt: Museum für
Angewandte Kunst (MAK), 2003. Accessed 7 September 2012.
http://www.digitalcraft.org/index.php?artikel\_id=502.

Čučković, Boris and Hrvoje Stančić. “Open Source in Art: Originality,
Art Process and Digital Preservation.” In *INFuture2009: Digital
Resources and Knowledge Sharing, Second International Conference ‘The
Future of Information Science’ (INFuture), November 4–6, Proceedings.*
(2009): 157–67.

Davis, Joshua. *PrayStation Hardrive (CD-ROM)*. System Design Limited,
2001.

Debian Project, The. “Debian Worldwide Mirror Sites.” (2011). Accessed
11 July 2012. http://www.debian.org/mirror/list-full.en.html.

Definition of Free Cultural Works, The. “Definition of Free Cultural
Works 1.0.” (2007) Accessed 7 September 2012.
http://freedomdefined.org/index.php?title= Definition&oldid=4582.

Dekker, Annet. “Serious Archiving: Preserving the Intangible by
Capturing Processes. Annet Dekker in Conversation with Jeroen van
Mastrigt” In *Archive 2020: Sustainable Archiving of Born-Digital
Cultural Content*, edited by Annet Dekker, 79–87. Amsterdam: Virtueel
Platform, 2010.

Draves, Scott. “The Electric Sheep Screen-Saver: A Case Study in
Aesthetic Evolution Applications of Evolutionary Computing.” In
*Applications of Evolutionary Computing, (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3449)*, edited by Franz Rothlauf, et al., 458–67.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 2005.

Fuller, Matthew. *Behind the Blip: Essays on the Culture of Software*.
New York, NJ: Autonomedia, 2003.

Jung, Carl G. *Modern Man in Search of a Soul*. Translated by W.S. Dell
and Cary F. Baynes. London: Routledge, 2001 \[first edition 1933\].

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. *Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
Imagination*. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2008.

Krysa, Joasia and Grzesiek Sedek. “Source Code.” In *Software Studies: A
Lexicon*, edited by Matthew Fuller, 236–43. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, 2008.

Laforet, Anne, Aymeric Mansoux and Marloes de Valk. “Rock, Paper,
Scissors and Floppy Disks.” In *Archive 2020. Sustainable Archiving of
Born-Digital Cultural Content*, edited by Annet Dekker, 21–9. Amsterdam:
Virtueel Platform, 2010.

Laforet, Anne. *Le Net Art au Musée. Stratégies de Conservation des
Oeuvres en Ligne*, Paris: Editions Questions Théoriques, 2011.

Lee, Chun. “Art Unlimited: An Investigation into Contemporary Digital
Arts and the Free Software Movement.” PhD diss., Middlesex University,
London, 2008. Accessed 7 September 2012.
http://eprints.mdx.ac.uk/4963/1/ChunLeeThesis.pdf.

Mansoux, Aymeric. “The Sound of Network Topologies.” *Neural*. No. 38
(2011), 19–22.

Myers, Rob. “Cultural Sources.” 26 August 2007. Accessed 7 September
2012. http://robmyers.org/weblog/2007/08/26/cultural-sources/.

Murdock, Ian. “A Brief History of Debian (Appendix A: ‘The Debian
Manifesto’).” (1994). Accessed 7 February 2012.
http://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/project-history/ap-manifesto.en.html.

Open Art Network. “The Source License.” (2004) Accessed 7 September
2012.
http://web.archive.org/web/20041208023918/http://three.org/openart/.

Open Knowledge Foundation. “Open Definition.” Version 1.1 (2012).
Accessed 7 September 2012. http://opendefinition.org/okd/.

Peña-López, Ismael. “The Four Kinds of Freedom of Free Knowledge.”
*ICTlogy*. No. 1, October (2003). Accessed 7 September 2012.
http://ictlogy.net/review/?p=12.

Perens, Burce. “Debian Social Contract.” Version 1.0, 5 July (1997).
Accessed 7 February 2012.
http://www.debian.org/social\_contract.1.0.en.html.

Perens, Bruce. “The Open Source Definition.” In *Open Sources: Voices
from the Open Source Revolution*, edited by Mark Stone, Chris DiBona and
Sam Ockman, 171–88. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 1999.

Perens, Bruce. “Re:1997 ?” (2009). Accessed 7 November 2012.
http://news.slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=1129863&cid=26875815.

Raymond, Eric S. “Goodbye, ‘Free Software’; Hello, ‘Open Source’.”
(1998). Accessed 7 May 2012. http://www.catb.org/\~esr/open-source.html.

Stallman, Richard M. “What Is the Free Software Foundation?” *GNU’s
Bulletin*. Vol. 1, no. 1 (1989): 8–9. Accessed 7 February 2012.
http://www.electricsheep.org.

Stallman, Richard M. “Philosophy of the GNU Project. What Is Free
Software?” (2000). Accessed 7 September 2012.
http://web.archive.org/web/20000302065400/http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html.

Teza, Mario, Luiz Teza, Diego Saravia, Juan Carlos Gentile and Luis
González. *Manifiesto de Hipatia*. Buenos Aires (2001). Accessed 7
September 2012. http://www.hipatia.net/index.php?id= manifesto\_es.

Villenave, Valentin. “Re: Sources d’une Oeuvre.” (2011). Accessed 7
September 2012.
https://listes.april.org/wws/arc/copyleft\_attitude/2011-10/msg00042.html.

Willey, David. “Open Education License Draft.” 8 August 2007. Accessed 7
September 2012. http://opencontent.org/blog/archives/355.
